>> Thank You Ann!

Our project focuses on the relationship age has on the decline of neuromuscular activity and morphology,
And how that impacts balance recovery

So we look at stepping reactions as an objective meaurement to get a better picture of this issue.

The procedure has a name called Choice Stepping Reaction Time Task.
This assesses the brain to muscle connection in making a decision for initiating a fast, appropriate step.
This test asks participants to step on a designated target when they get a visual cue.
This measures the cognitive-motor function, coordination, balance, and reaction speed time in taking steps.

The set up for this test includes force place, which are like platforms on the ground that capture the weight transfer and foot contact.
There is also motion capture video to evaluate stepping speed and patterns of leg-foot movements.

So ideally, someone who is fast and good at  stepping while reacting to a color change or other signal would ideally be good at stepping to avoid falling if they were to randomly loose their balance.
We are meauring fall risk.

>>> Next Slide

Now that we’ve covered how we measure stepping reactions, let’s talk about the muscles involved in balance recovery.

So hip muscles, 
particularly the hip abductors, 
have influence in maintaining stability and preventing falls. 
They are key in controlling lateral stepping, which is the kind of stepping used when recovering from a loss of balance.

One key factor is hip abductor torque, or the rotational force these generated by these muscled. 
So a stronger and quicker response is gonna stabilize movement and reduce fall risk. 
According to previous research, older adults experience a delayed activation in hip abductors.
Thus making them more vulnerable to falling.

We also see that intramuscular fat in the gluteus medius—but not the tensor fascia latae—is linked to fall risk. This suggests that changes in muscle archutecture-- and not just strength-- give way to instability.

Since prior studies have focused mainly on the gluteus medius and tensor fascia latae,
it makes sense to pivot toward studying hip muscles functions and role in regards to falling.

So by seeing how these muscles activate and respond in real time,
it allows us to better predict fall risk and develop more effective strategies to enhance balance recovery.


>>> Next Slide

So now we can discuss data components.

>>> Next Slide

We are currently working with 21 observations.
This is 13 younger adults and 8 older adults.



Each aim involves different Dependent variables will each use the same covariates and independent variables.

Because aim 1 focuses more on the steppinf preformance, our dependent variables are the metrics taken from the Choice Stepping reaction time task that was introduced two slide back be. 

For aim 2, because we are exploring more of the muscle structure involved, well be analyzing EMG data and obviously the structure of the muscle like size, stiffness, connective tissue proportion, and fat proportion.

As of now, the independent is age group.
And the boundry between what makes you older is if you are 65 or more.
So younger is otherwise.

Other covariates are metrics taken from 4 clinical assesments which we can go into more depth on the next slide.

>> Next SLide

So we have the Four Square Step Test, which evaluates stepping ability and coordination. 
Participants step over four boundaries that are in a plus sign pattern. This is done clockwise and counter clockwise.
The best time out of two times trials is recorded
giving us a time metric.

The Timed Up-and-Go Test, participant starts seated in a chair.
The timer starts at “go”, they stand up, walk 3 meters, turn around, walk back, and sit down. 
Timer stops when their buttocks makes contact with the seat. 
This metric we care about is time.

We have the Stair Climb Power Test (SCPT).
Participants start at the base of a staircase
And when given the signal, climb the staircase as fast a possible.
Timer starts when someone says "go", and stops when both feet reach the top of the step. 
The metric we care about is Power.
So Joules over seconds.
THey calculate this using body weight, stair height, and time taken to complete the climb.

Finally, we have the Handgrip Strength Test, which measures grip force using a handheld device called a dina mom itter. 
Participant sits with their arm positioned at a 90-degree angle with forearm neutral. 
They perform three trials, and the average score is taken.
This gives us a metric of force.


