Math 536, HW 1:
1. Download the HW1P1.csv file. In this file you will find two variables, females
and males. Females contains the salary on a random sample of female
employees from a tech company in Northern California. Males contains a
random sample of males from the same tech company. Your goal is to
investigate whether or not there is gender discrimination within that
company with regards to pay (i.e. males are making more than females).

Part a: First run a valid statistical test using a central limit theorem (i.e. the
classical theoretical way). Please report and interpret your p-value.

Part b: Now repeat the process of statistical inference but this time you may
not assume anything about your sample summary. You must instead
bootstrap a p-value.
Please write a small report, no more than a paragraph or two relating your
results to the company’s interests in discovery. Please only provide relevant
statistical output.


2. Does bootstrapping always work? In this problem we want to begin with a
population, I don’t care what your population is but something robust
(maybe like 50,000 data observations from a well defined numerical
distribution).

Part a. For a given sample size of 20, draw 10,000 samples, all of size 20.
Compute the 90%tile of each sample. Plot the 90%tiles of each sample along
with the true 90%tile of your population. Do you believe that the 90%tile of
a sample of size 20 is an unbiased estimator of the population parameter
90%tile?

Part b. Take a single sample of size 20. Record the 90%tile. Now draw
10,000 bootstrap samples of size 20 from your original sample. Plot the
10,000 BS estimates of the 90%tile along with the true 90%tile of your
original sample. Are your bootstrap estimates of the 90%tile biased? Can
you quantify the amount of bias?

Part c. Combining parts a. and b. Take a single sample of size 20 from your
population and come up with a Bootstrapped Confidence interval for the
90%tile of the population...Don’t forget to correct for bias!
Please submit your plots with brief discussion for each part.
